docs: restructure tutorial pages and add glossary (#606)
oracle/macaron: docs/source/pages/tutorials/commit_finder.rst

.. Copyright (c) 2024 - 2024, Oracle and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved.
.. Licensed under the Universal Permissive License v 1.0 as shown at https://oss.oracle.com/licenses/upl/.

---------------------------------------------------------
Analyzing and comparing different versions of an artifact
---------------------------------------------------------

This tutorial demonstrates how Macaron can be used to determine the differences between one or more states of the single open-source repository that produced one or more related artifacts. In this way, we show how a developer can be potentially misled by supply chain security information that has been created for the current state of an artifact's source repository, rather than the version of the artifact they are actually using.

> he problem of mapping artifacts to the source code that built them is a challenging one, as most artifacts, even open-source ones, do not provide a direct URL to the related repository and commit. In principle, provenances, such as :term:`SLSA` or :term:`Witness`, which contain the commit that was used to build the artifact provide the information that we need. However, currently the adoption rate in the open-source community is low, therefore limiting its value for this task.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The problem of mapping artifacts to the source code that built them is a challenging one, as most artifacts, even open-source ones, do not provide a direct URL to the related repository and commit. 

For finding repositories, services exist to make up for this lack, including Google's `Open Source Insights <https://deps.dev>`_ tool that is in use by Macaron itself for this exact reason. However, without the commit as well, analysis of these repositories will reflect only the current state at the time of execution. One example of this is `OpenSSF Scorecard <https://github.com/ossf/scorecard>`_, an automated tool that performs a number of software security checks on a given project. These projects are typically provided in the form of a repository's public URL, which will be examined at its current state.

For finding commits, we can look inside the provenances for an artifact, such as :term:`SLSA` or :term:`Witness`, as these contain a record of the commit used to build that artifact. However, the current adoption rate in the open-source community of producing provenances is low, therefore limiting its value for this task. Instead, Macaron makes use of an alternative solution: the Commit Finder feature. This feature performs a best effort attempt to map a given artifact to the exact commit that was used to create it so that the correct state for a given artifact can be analyzed. Commits are discovered by matching artifact versions to tags within repositories, necessitating a requirement that any repository to be analyzed makes use of tags in a way that closely corresponds to the produced artifact's version numbers. 
```

Author: See commit [4f11927](https://github.com/oracle/macaron/pull/606/commits/4f11927a8dd7d67b9aa1c61c31c980bba03f24fa)

> Services exist to make up for this lack, including Google's `open-source Insights <https://deps.dev/>`_ tool that is in use by Macaron itself for this exact reason. However, without taking further steps, analysis of these repositories will reflect only the current state at the time of execution. One example of this is `OpenSSF Scorecard <https://github.com/ossf/scorecard>`_, an automated tool that performs a number of software security checks on a given project. These projects are typically provided in the form of a repository's public URL, which will be examined at its current state.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Author: See commit [4f11927](https://github.com/oracle/macaron/pull/606/commits/4f11927a8dd7d67b9aa1c61c31c980bba03f24fa)

> To facilitate greater accuracy during analysis, Macaron allows analyzing an artifact and its corresponding repository state by using the Commit Finder feature. This feature performs a best effort attempt to map a given artifact to the exact commit that was used to create it by comparing repository tags with artifact versions. Therefore, it has a requirement that any repository to be analyzed makes use of tags in a way that closely corresponds to the produced artifact's version numbers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

For this tutorial, we analyze the Python library, `Arrow <https://github.com/arrow-py/arrow>`_. Arrow is a popular library designed to improve the developer experience for manipulating dates and times.

************
Installation
************

Please follow the instructions :ref:`here <installation-guide>`. In summary, you need:

* Docker
* the ``run_macaron.sh``  script to run the Macaron image.

.. note:: At the moment, Docker alternatives (e.g. podman) are not supported.

*************
Prerequisites
*************

You need to provide Macaron with a GitHub token through the ``GITHUB_TOKEN``  environment variable.

To obtain a GitHub Token:

* Go to ``GitHub settings`` → ``Developer Settings`` (at the bottom of the left side pane) → ``Personal Access Tokens`` → ``Fine-grained personal access tokens`` → ``Generate new token``. Give your token a name and an expiry period.
* Under ``"Repository access"``, choosing ``"Public Repositories (read-only)"`` should be good enough in most cases.

Now you should be good to run Macaron. For more details, see the documentation :ref:`here <prepare-github-token>`.

> 

Reviewer: Is it possible to wrap installation and prerequisites in a box of some kind? Although required for this tutorial, it feels as if they are separate from the general flow.

Author: See commit [4f11927](https://github.com/oracle/macaron/pull/606/commits/4f11927a8dd7d67b9aa1c61c31c980bba03f24fa)

.. code-block:: shell

    ./run_macaron.sh analyze -rp https://github.com/arrow-py/arrow --skip-deps

However, this will return results based only on the current state of the repository, which as described above, is not what we want to achieve in this tutorial. To perform analyses on other repository states, we need to provide Macaron with the target artifact versions in the form of `PURLs <https://github.com/package-url/purl-spec>`_, or Package URLs, which is a convenient way to encodify packages from different ecosystems into the same format.

In our case we are looking at a Python package, so our PURL must reflect that. For versions we will analyze ``1.3.0`` and ``0.15.0``, giving us the following PURLs:

.. code-block:: shell

    pkg:pypi/arrow@1.3.0
    pkg:pypi/arrow@0.15.0

.. note:: Macaron also accepts a branch and digest alongside a repository URL for analyzing a specific state. By using a PURL we let Macaron determine these details itself, saving us the trouble of looking them up.

We will start by running the analysis on the latest version, ``1.3.0``, with the following command:

.. code-block:: shell

>     ./run_macaron.sh analyze -purl pkg:pypi/arrow@1.3.0

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    ./run_macaron.sh analyze -purl pkg:pypi/arrow@1.3.0 --skip-deps
```

Author: See commit [4f11927](https://github.com/oracle/macaron/pull/606/commits/4f11927a8dd7d67b9aa1c61c31c980bba03f24fa)

The analysis involves Macaron downloading the contents of the target repository to the configured, or default, ``output`` folder. Results from the analysis, including checks, are stored in the database found at ``output/macaron.db``  (See :ref:`Output Files Guide <output_files_guide>`). Once the analysis is complete, Macaron will also produce a report in the form of a HTML file.

.. code-block:: shell

  open output/reports/pypi/arrow/arrow.html

.. note:: When analyzing multiple versions of the same software component, keep in mind that Macaron will override the output HTML and JSON reports in subsequent runs, but still keep results for each version in the database.

.. _fig_arrow_1.3.0_top:

.. figure:: ../../_static/images/tutorial_arrow_1.3.0_report_top.png
   :alt: HTML report for ``arrow 1.3.0``, summary
   :align: center

.. _fig_arrow_1.3.0:

.. figure:: ../../_static/images/tutorial_arrow_1.3.0_report.png
   :alt: HTML report for ``arrow 1.3.0``, checks
   :align: center

> The image above shows the results of the checks for the `Arrow <https://github.com/arrow-py/arrow>`_ repository at the commit where version ``1.3.0`` was produced.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This image shows the results of the checks for the `Arrow <https://github.com/arrow-py/arrow>`_ repository at the commit where version ``1.3.0`` was produced.
```

Author: See commit [4f11927](https://github.com/oracle/macaron/pull/606/commits/4f11927a8dd7d67b9aa1c61c31c980bba03f24fa)

> In summary, our analysis finds the following information about this artifact:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In summary, our analysis finds that the artifact has:
```

Author: See commit [4f11927](https://github.com/oracle/macaron/pull/606/commits/4f11927a8dd7d67b9aa1c61c31c980bba03f24fa)

> * A commit at a Git repository that corresponds to the artifact (``mcn_version_control_system_1``)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* A commit in a Git repository that corresponds to the artifact (``mcn_version_control_system_1``)
```

Author: See commit [4f11927](https://github.com/oracle/macaron/pull/606/commits/4f11927a8dd7d67b9aa1c61c31c980bba03f24fa)

> * The build tool ``pip`` used in the build scripts (``mcn_build_script_1``)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Build scripts for the build tool ``pip`` (``mcn_build_script_1``)
```

Author: See commit [4f11927](https://github.com/oracle/macaron/pull/606/commits/4f11927a8dd7d67b9aa1c61c31c980bba03f24fa)

*****************************
Run ``verify-policy`` command
*****************************

Another feature of Macaron is policy verification. This allows Macaron to report on whether an artifact meets the security requirements specified by the user. Policies are written using `Soufflé Datalog <https://souffle-lang.github.io/index.html>`_ , a language similar to SQL. Results collected by the ``analyze`` command can be checked via declarative queries in the created policy, which Macaron can then automatically check.

> The security requirement chosen for this tutorial reflects the difference between the two versions in the previous section. That is, we want to ensure that the artifact has a valid build service. If we refer back to :ref:`step <fig_arrow_0.15.0>` and :ref:`step <fig_arrow_1.3.0>`, we can see that the relevant check ID of the difference between the two versions is ``mcn_build_as_code_1``. To include this in a policy we create the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The security requirement chosen for this tutorial reflects the difference between the two versions in the previous section. That is, we want to ensure that the artifact has a valid build service. If we refer back to :ref:`Arrow 0.15.0 <fig_arrow_0.15.0>` and :ref:`Arrow 1.3.0 <fig_arrow_1.3.0>`, we can see that the relevant check ID of the difference between the two versions is ``mcn_build_as_code_1``. To include this in a policy we create the following:
```

Author: See commit [4f11927](https://github.com/oracle/macaron/pull/606/commits/4f11927a8dd7d67b9aa1c61c31c980bba03f24fa)

.. code-block:: c++

    #include "prelude.dl"

    Policy("has-hosted-build", component_id, "Require a hosted build and publishing service.") :-

>         check_passed(component_id, "mcn_build_as_code_1").

Reviewer: Should the other failed check be added here as well?

Author: I have tried to clarify that in the description.

Author: See commit [4f11927](https://github.com/oracle/macaron/pull/606/commits/4f11927a8dd7d67b9aa1c61c31c980bba03f24fa)

    apply_policy_to("has-hosted-build", component_id) :-
        is_component(component_id, purl),
        match("pkg:pypi/arrow.*", purl).

> The second part of the above policy, ``apply_policy_to``, applies the policy to software components found within Macaron's database based on the conditions within it. In this case, any software component whose PURL begins with ``pkg:pypi/arrow`` will be verified by the policy, thanks to Soufflé's `match constraint <https://souffle-lang.github.io/constraints>`_ that can be used for string matching. This will capture both versions of the Arrow library used in the previous section. To use the completed policy, we save it to an easily accessible location, such as the directory Macaron is in, with a name such as ``has-hosted-build.dl``. With the policy file created and saved, we can have Macaron run is as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The second part of the above policy, ``apply_policy_to``, applies the policy to software components found within Macaron's database based on the conditions within it. In this case, any software component whose PURL begins with ``pkg:pypi/arrow`` will be verified by the policy, thanks to Soufflé's `match constraint <https://souffle-lang.github.io/constraints>`_ that can be used for string matching. This will capture both versions of the Arrow library used in the previous section. To use the completed policy, we save it to an easily accessible location, such as the directory Macaron is in, with a name such as ``has-hosted-build.dl``. With the policy file created and saved, we can have Macaron run it as follows:
```

Author: See commit [4f11927](https://github.com/oracle/macaron/pull/606/commits/4f11927a8dd7d67b9aa1c61c31c980bba03f24fa)

.. code-block:: shell

  ./run_macaron.sh verify-policy --database ./output/macaron.db --file ./has-hosted-build.dl

At the end of the output of this command, Macaron will display the following:

.. code-block:: javascript

    passed_policies
    component_satisfies_policy
        ['1', 'pkg:pypi/arrow@1.3.0', 'has-hosted-build']
    failed_policies
        ['has-hosted-build']
    component_violates_policy
        ['2', 'pkg:pypi/arrow@0.15.0', 'has-hosted-build']

This confirms the findings of the previous section, showing that the earlier version of the Arrow library does not meet our expectations in that it is lacking a discoverable build service, while the more recent version is just fine and passes.

***********
Future Work
***********

> Mapping artifact to commits within repositories is a challenging endeavour. Macron's Commit Finder feature relies on repositories having and using version tags in a sensible way (a tag is considered sensible if it closely matches the version it represents). An alternative, or complimentary, approach would be to make use of the information found within provenance files, where information such as the commit hash used to create the artifact can potentially be found. Additionally, it should be noted that the Commit Finder feature was modelled on the intentions of developers (in terms of tag usage) within a large quantity of Java projects. This should translate well to other languages, as tag formatting is generally language agnostic, there may be some improvements to be made by further testing on a large number of non-Java projects.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Mapping artifact to commits within repositories is a challenging endeavour. Macron's Commit Finder feature relies on repositories having and using version tags in a sensible way (a tag is considered sensible if it closely matches the version it represents). An alternative, or complimentary, approach would be to make use of the information found within provenance files, where information such as the commit hash used to create the artifact can potentially be found. Additionally, it should be noted that the Commit Finder feature was modelled on the intentions of developers (in terms of tag usage) within a large quantity of Java projects. As tag formatting is generally language agnostic in the same way that versioning schemes are, this should translate well to other languages. However, there may be some improvements to be made by further testing on a large number of non-Java projects.
```

Author: See commit [4f11927](https://github.com/oracle/macaron/pull/606/commits/4f11927a8dd7d67b9aa1c61c31c980bba03f24fa)

Analyzing and comparing different versions of an artifact
---------------------------------------------------------

This tutorial demonstrates how Macaron can be used to determine the differences between one or more
states of the single open-source repository that produced one or more related artifacts. In this way,
we show how a developer can be potentially misled by supply chain security information that has been
created for the current state of an artifact's source repository, rather than the version of the

> artifact they are actually using.

Reviewer: Lines 8 to 12 here should be a single line for consistency.

Author: See commit [441888a](https://github.com/oracle/macaron/pull/606/commits/441888afdb2cd23b20be86fe1e55ec0be23a2af1)

It is challenging to map artifacts to the source code because most artifacts, even open-source ones, do

> not provide a direct URL to the related repository and commit:

Reviewer: Same here for 14 to 15.

Author: See commit [441888a](https://github.com/oracle/macaron/pull/606/commits/441888afdb2cd23b20be86fe1e55ec0be23a2af1)
